Add guide on creating package docs (#4196)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/How-To-Guides/Documenting-a-ROS-2-Package.rst

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 2
   :local:

This guide introduces the standard way to create documentation for ROS 2 packages.
This guide demonstrates the preferred way to create documentation for your personal ROS 2 packages.
For packages with binary releases this also results in the docs being hosted at ``docs.ros.org/en/<distro>/p/<package>/``.
For information on how to contribute to this documentation on docs.ros.org, see :doc:`Contributing to ROS 2 Documentation <../The-ROS2-Project/Contributing/Contributing-To-ROS-2-Documentation>`.

Prerequisites
-------------

- :doc:`Install ROS <../../Installation>`

- `Install rosdoc2 <https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rosdoc2#installation>`__

Package Documentation Overview
------------------------------

The type of documentation discussed in this guide is referred to as "package docs" or "API docs".
For ROS packages that have been released on ROS Index, their documentation will be built on the ROS buildfarm, included on docs.ros.org, and visible on via the ``API Docs`` button on index.ros.org.

The tool responsible for generating ROS 2 package docs is `rosdoc2 <https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rosdoc2>`__.

> ``Rosdoc2`` is a convenient wrapper around the commonly used `Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/>`__ documentation framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``rosdoc2`` is a convenient wrapper around the commonly used `Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/>`__ documentation framework.
```

I think that's how we want that formatted. Do code rules supercede English rules?

Author: i changed it to be ` ``rosdoc2`` ` everywhere

Reviewer: Thanks!

> ``Rosdoc2`` is a convenient wrapper around the commonly used `Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/>`__ documentation framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``rosdoc2`` is a convenient wrapper around the commonly used `Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/>`__ documentation framework.
```

Sphinx allows freeform written documentation as well as API documentation for python code generated from comments in the code.
The `breathe <https://breathe.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ + `exhale <https://exhale.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ packages allow integration with Doxygen, to include autogenerated C++ API documentation as well.

``Rosdoc2`` creates a default configuration for packages with no documentation or configuration at all, and applies options for a uniform theme and integration with other packages.

Building Package Docs
---------------------

To generate the documentation for a package in HTML format with rosdoc2, run:

.. code-block:: console

   rosdoc2 build --package-path <package-path>

The documentation is written to ``docs_output/<package-name>/index.html`` and can be viewed in a browser.

Configuration
-------------

There are three configuration locations for ROS package docs: ``rosdoc2.yaml`` for general settings,
``conf.py`` for sphinx settings and the ``Doxyfile`` for doxygen settings.

> For all of those, a default is assumed or generated if not present, so neither of those is strictly required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For all of those, a default is assumed or generated if not present, so none of them is strictly required.
```

However, it might be necessary to create and modify those once you want to use features such as custom textual documentation pages.

rosdoc2.yaml
^^^^^^^^^^^^

This is the main entrypoint for rosdoc2.
It specifies generic settings, and can be used to control the execution of specific builders (Doxygen and Sphinx) and decides which builders to run.

> Rosdoc2 provides a multitude of configuration options, which can be adjusted in a config file ``rosdoc2.yaml``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``rosdoc2`` provides a multitude of configuration options, which can be adjusted in a config file ``rosdoc2.yaml``.
```

To generate a default ``rosdoc2.yaml`` which you can then further customize, run:

.. code-block:: console

   rosdoc2 default_config --package-path <package-path>

And add ``<rosdoc2>rosdoc2.yaml</rosdoc2>`` to the export section in your ``package.xml``:

.. code-block:: xml

    <package>
        <!-- [...] -->
        <export>
            <!-- [...] -->
            <rosdoc2>rosdoc2.yaml</rosdoc2>
        </export>
    </package>

> For most packages however, the default settings in ``rosdoc2`` will suffice, without a custom config file at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, for most packages,  the default settings in ``rosdoc2`` will suffice, and no custom config is necessary.
```

More information about ``rosdoc2.yaml`` can be found in the `rosdoc2 readme <https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rosdoc2#using-a-rosdoc2yaml-file-to-control-how-your-package-is-documented>`__.

conf.py, rosdoc2_settings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The final output of the package docs is (almost) always built by Sphinx.
Each Sphinx project is configured by a ``conf.py`` file in the ``doc`` directory.
If no configuration is present, a default Sphinx project is created and used when building the documentation.
If however a ``conf.py`` Sphinx config is found in the ``doc`` subdirectory of the package, this is used instead.

> A custom Sphinx project is required if standalone reStructuredText documentation pages should be included.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A custom Sphinx project is required if you want to include a standalone reStructuredText documentation page. 
A standalone documentation page can be used to list multiple tutorials and guides; if that's something you want for your package you'll need to create a custom Sphing project. 
```

Hopefully this makes it a bit more clear.

Doxygen-only docs are possible by only enabling the Doxygen builder in ``rosdoc2.yaml``, but rather uncommon.

Customizing Sphinx Documentation
--------------------------------

Creating a Sphinx Project
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In order to add standalone documentation pages in addition to the automatically generated API docs, a custom Sphinx project is necessary.
This should be created in a subdirectory called ``doc`` in the package directory.
A new Sphinx project can be created by running ``sphinx-quickstart``` in the ``doc`` directory, answering ``no`` to "Separate source and build directories".
The wizard requires entering the project name, author and version, but this can later be removed and will be provided to Sphinx by ``rosdoc2`` from your packages ``package.xml``.
More information about creating a sphinx project can be found on the `Sphinx quickstart page <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/quickstart.html>`__,

Customizing ``index.rst``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``sphinx-quickstart`` wizard creates an ``index.rst`` file, which is the custom landing page for your package, similar to a Github ``README`` file.

Adding Python API-Docs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Rosdoc2 by default uses the `sphinx-apidoc tool <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/man/sphinx-apidoc.html>`__ and the `autodoc Sphinx extension <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/autodoc.html>`__ to automatically generate documentation for python code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default ``rosdoc2``  uses the `sphinx-apidoc tool <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/man/sphinx-apidoc.html>`__ and the `autodoc Sphinx extension <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/autodoc.html>`__ to automatically generate documentation for python code.
```

In order for autodoc to find the Python modules in your package, it must be added to the python search path in ``conf.py``:

.. code-block:: python

    sys.path.insert(0, os.path.abspath('.'))

Since rosdoc2 wraps the custom ``conf.py`` with more configuration from a script which will be placed in the package In this case the ``.``  path in ``os.path.abspath`` refers to the package's directory root, not the package's ``doc`` directory due to the interaction between rosdoc2 and ``conf.py``.

> The API docs are already reachable through the "Module Index" link that is present on the landing page by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, package API docs are already reachable through the "Module Index" link that is present on the landing page.
```

For the API docs to also appear in the table of contents, simply add a link to the ``modules`` page to your ``index.rst``:

.. code-block:: rst

    .. toctree::
       :maxdepth: 2
       :caption: Contents:

       Python Modules <modules>

Adding C++ API-Docs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To add the automatically generated API docs from the default sphinx project for C++ back to a custom landing page, add ``generated/index`` to the docs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add the automatically generated API docs from the default Sphinx project for C++ back to a custom landing page, add ``generated/index`` to the docs:
```

> To add the automatically generated API docs from the default sphinx project for C++ back to a custom landing page, add ``generated/index`` to the docs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you would like to add your automatically generated API docs back to your custom landing page, add the line ``generated/index``  to your documentation page where you would like the API docs to appear:
```

I think this might be a bit clearer.

.. code-block:: rst

   .. toctree::
      :maxdepth: 2

      C++ API Docs <generated/index>

This adds the elements "Class Hierarchy", "File Hierarchy" and "Reference" to the table of contents in the sidebar.
To make those appear under one "C++ API Docs" heading for a less cluttered sidebar, a separate file such as ``cpp_api_docs.rst`` can be added, which links to the generated docs:

.. code-block:: rst

>     :caption: cpp_api_docs.rst

Reviewer: Beautiful, this is really helpful.

Author: thanks!

    C++ API Docs
    ============

    These are the autogenerated docs for the internal implementation.

    .. toctree::
       :maxdepth: 3
       :caption: Contents:

       generated/index

Which then also needs to be added in  ``index.rst`` to appear in the sidebar:

.. code-block:: rst
    :caption: index.rst

    .. toctree::
       :maxdepth: 2
       :caption: Contents:

       cpp_api_docs

> Including an existing README.md

Reviewer: This section is amazing and I really appreciate the effort!

-------------------------------

If your git repository already has an existing ``README.md``, it is possible to reuse this as the landing page for the documentation, without duplicating the contents.

> To correctly include a markdown file in Sphinx while preserving relative links and images, some additional effort is required:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To correctly include a Markdown file in Sphinx while preserving relative links and images, some additional effort is required. 
```

.. code-block:: rst
    :caption: index.rst

    .. include:: readme_include.md
       :parser: myst_parser.sphinx_

This also requires adding ``myst_parser`` to the extensions in ``conf.py``:

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: conf.py

    extensions = ["myst_parser"]

CI, docs.ros.org
----------------

The ROS build farm uses rosdoc2 to build the package documentation hosted at ``docs.ros.org/en/<distro>/p/<package>/``.
To enable this, the repository containing the documentation must be configured in `rosdistro/<ROS DISTRO>/distribution.yaml <https://github.com/ros/rosdistro/blob/master/rolling/distribution.yaml>`__.
This would usually be the package source repository:

.. code-block:: yaml

      <package_name>:
        doc:
          type: git
          url: https://github.com/<github_username>/<package_name>.git
          version: main
        release:
        [...]

The buildfarm hosts the documentation for every distribution separately, and periodically rebuilds it from the latest commit on the specified branch.
It is not required to tag a new release to update the hosted documentation.

> 

Reviewer: @clalancette where do package API documentation builds show up on the build farm? Are they part of the package's build or a distinct entity? We should probably point out where package maintainers can check their documentation builds. 

@ottojo We should probably have a line that is something like, "To view the status of your package's documentation build, please check <URL Pattern for Package Docs on build farm>."

Author: I added a note on where to find the doc jobs on build.ros2.org :+1:

Reviewer: Beautiful. Thanks so much.

Documenting a ROS 2 package
###########################

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 2
   :local:

This guide introduces the standard way to create documentation for ROS 2 packages.

> This guide demonstrates the preferred way to create documentation for your personal ROS 2 packages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide introduces the standard way to create documentation for ROS 2 packages.
```

(it seems redundant)

For information on how to contribute to this documentation on docs.ros.org, see :doc:`Contributing to ROS 2 Documentation <../The-ROS2-Project/Contributing/Contributing-To-ROS-2-Documentation>`.

Prerequisites
-------------

- :doc:`Install ROS <../../Installation>`

- `Install rosdoc2 <https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rosdoc2#installation>`__

Package Documentation Overview
------------------------------

The type of documentation discussed in this guide is referred to as "package docs" or "API docs".

> For ROS packages that have been released on ROS Index, their documentation will be built on the ROS buildfarm, included on docs.ros.org, and visible on via the ``API Docs`` button on index.ros.org.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For ROS packages that have been released on ROS Index, their documentation will be built on the ROS buildfarm, included on docs.ros.org, and visible via the ``API Docs`` button on index.ros.org.
```

   rosdoc2 default_config --package-path <package-path>

And add ``<rosdoc2>rosdoc2.yaml</rosdoc2>`` to the export section in your ``package.xml``:

.. code-block:: xml

    <package>
        <!-- [...] -->
        <export>
            <!-- [...] -->
            <rosdoc2>rosdoc2.yaml</rosdoc2>
        </export>
    </package>

However, for most packages,  the default settings in ``rosdoc2`` will suffice, and no custom config is necessary.
More information about ``rosdoc2.yaml`` can be found in the `rosdoc2 readme <https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rosdoc2#using-a-rosdoc2yaml-file-to-control-how-your-package-is-documented>`__.

conf.py, rosdoc2_settings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The final output of the package docs is (almost) always built by Sphinx.
Each Sphinx project is configured by a ``conf.py`` file in the ``doc`` directory.
If no configuration is present, a default Sphinx project is created and used when building the documentation.
If however a ``conf.py`` Sphinx config is found in the ``doc`` subdirectory of the package, this is used instead.
A custom Sphinx project is required if you want to include a standalone reStructuredText documentation page.

> A standalone documentation page can be used to list multiple tutorials and guides; if that's something you want for your package you'll need to create a custom Sphing project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A standalone documentation page can be used to list multiple tutorials and guides; if that's something you want for your package you'll need to create a custom Sphinx project.
```

``rosdoc2`` provides additional settings to ``conf.py`` and overrides some.
Information about changes done to the Sphinx settings are logged to the console with a ``[rosdoc2]`` prefix.

Doxyfile
^^^^^^^^

Doxygen is a tool for automatically generating C++ API docs from code comments.
While Doxygen can also generate HTML output directly, in the usual workflow for ROS packages, Doxygen produces machine readable output in XML format which is then consumed by Sphinx and integrated with the rest of the documentation.

> Doxygen-only docs are possible by only enabling the Doxygen builder in ``rosdoc2.yaml``, but rather uncommon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Doxygen-only docs are possible by only enabling the Doxygen builder in ``rosdoc2.yaml``, but this is uncommon.
```

Customizing Sphinx Documentation
--------------------------------

Creating a Sphinx Project
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In order to add standalone documentation pages in addition to the automatically generated API docs, a custom Sphinx project is necessary.
This should be created in a subdirectory called ``doc`` in the package directory.

> A new Sphinx project can be created by running ``sphinx-quickstart``` in the ``doc`` directory, answering ``no`` to "Separate source and build directories".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A new Sphinx project can be created by running ``sphinx-quickstart`` in the ``doc`` directory, answering ``no`` to "Separate source and build directories".
```

The wizard requires entering the project name, author and version, but this can later be removed and will be provided to Sphinx by ``rosdoc2`` from your packages ``package.xml``.
More information about creating a sphinx project can be found on the `Sphinx quickstart page <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/quickstart.html>`__,

Customizing ``index.rst``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``sphinx-quickstart`` wizard creates an ``index.rst`` file, which is the custom landing page for your package, similar to a Github ``README`` file.

Adding Python API-Docs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default ``rosdoc2``  uses the `sphinx-apidoc tool <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/man/sphinx-apidoc.html>`__ and the `autodoc Sphinx extension <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/autodoc.html>`__ to automatically generate documentation for python code.
In order for autodoc to find the Python modules in your package, it must be added to the python search path in ``conf.py``:

.. code-block:: python

    sys.path.insert(0, os.path.abspath('.'))

> Since ``rosdoc2`` wraps the custom ``conf.py`` with more configuration from a script which will be placed in the package In this case the ``.``  path in ``os.path.abspath`` refers to the package's directory root, not the package's ``doc`` directory due to the interaction between rosdoc2 and ``conf.py``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is because ``rosdoc2`` wraps the custom ``conf.py`` with more configuration from a script which will be placed in the package.
In this case the ``.``  path in ``os.path.abspath`` refers to the package's directory root, not the package's ``doc`` directory due to the interaction between rosdoc2 and ``conf.py``.
```

.. code-block:: rst
    :caption: cpp_api_docs.rst

    C++ API Docs
    ============

    These are the autogenerated docs for the internal implementation.

    .. toctree::
       :maxdepth: 3
       :caption: Contents:

       generated/index

Which then also needs to be added in  ``index.rst`` to appear in the sidebar:

.. code-block:: rst
    :caption: index.rst

    .. toctree::
       :maxdepth: 2
       :caption: Contents:

       cpp_api_docs

Including an existing README.md
-------------------------------

If your git repository already has an existing ``README.md``, it is possible to reuse this as the landing page for the documentation, without duplicating the contents.
To correctly include a Markdown file in Sphinx while preserving relative links and images, some additional effort is required.

First, create a proxy-file ``readme_include.md`` next to ``index.rst``.
This is a markdown file which just includes the original README.md, but preserves the relative image paths, which would otherwise break in the next step:

.. code-block:: markdown
    :caption: readme_include.md

>     ```{include} ../README.md

Reviewer 2: Are these triple-quotes really correct for `markdown`?  It is fine if they are, it just looks odd to me.

Author: yes, triple backticks are standard markdown for code blocks

    :relative-images:
    ```

Then, include the contents of this file from ``index.rst`` using ``myst`` to include markdown from rst:

.. code-block:: rst
    :caption: index.rst

    .. include:: readme_include.md
       :parser: myst_parser.sphinx_

This also requires adding ``myst_parser`` to the extensions in ``conf.py``:

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: conf.py

    extensions = ["myst_parser"]

CI, docs.ros.org
----------------

The ROS build farm uses ``rosdoc2`` to build the package documentation hosted at ``docs.ros.org/en/<distro>/p/<package>/``.

> To enable this, the repository containing the documentation must be configured in `rosdistro/<ROS DISTRO>/distribution.yaml <https://github.com/ros/rosdistro/blob/master/rolling/distribution.yaml>`__.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable this, the repository containing the documentation must be configured in `rosdistro/{DISTRO}/distribution.yaml <https://github.com/ros/rosdistro/blob/master/{DISTRO}/distribution.yaml>`__.
```

Documenting a ROS 2 package
###########################

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 2
   :local:

> This guide will introduce the standard way to create documentation for ROS 2 packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide introduces the standard way to create documentation for ROS 2 packages.
```

> It is intended for developers who want to learn how to create documentation for custom packages in ROS 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide demonstrates the preferred way to create documentation for your personal ROS 2 packages.
```

For packages with binary releases this also results in the docs being hosted at
``docs.ros.org/en/<distro>/p/<package>/``.
For information on how to contribute to this documentation on docs.ros.org, see
:doc:`Contributing to ROS 2 Documentation <../The-ROS2-Project/Contributing/Contributing-To-ROS-2-Documentation>`.

Prerequisites
-------------

- :doc:`Install ROS <../../Installation>`

- `Install rosdoc2 <https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rosdoc2#installation>`__

Package Documentation Overview
------------------------------

The type of documentation discussed in this guide is referred to as "package docs" or "API docs".

> For released packages, this documentation built on the buildfarm and can be accessed via the ``API Docs`` button on index.ros.org.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For ROS packages that have been released on ROS Index, their documentation will be built on the ROS buildfarm, included on docs.ros.org, and visible on via the ``API Docs`` button on index.ros.org.
```

The tool responsible for generating ROS 2 package docs is `rosdoc2 <https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rosdoc2>`__.

``Rosdoc2`` is a convenient wrapper around the commonly used `Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/>`__ documentation
framework.
Sphinx allows freeform written documentation as well as API documentation for python code generated from comments in the code.
The `breathe <https://breathe.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ + `exhale <https://exhale.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__
packages allow integration with Doxygen, to include autogenerated C++ API documentation as well.

``Rosdoc2`` creates a default configuration for packages with no documentation or configuration at all, and applies options for a
uniform theme and integration with other packages.

TODO: Briefly explain builders?

Building Package Docs
---------------------

To generate the documentation for a package in HTML format with rosdoc2, run:

.. code-block:: console

   rosdoc2 build --package-path <package-path>

The documentation is written to ``docs_output/<package-name>/index.html`` and can be viewed in a browser.

Configuration
-------------

> There are three places for configuration for ROS package docs: ``rosdoc2.yaml`` for general settings,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are three configuration locations for ROS package docs: ``rosdoc2.yaml`` for general settings,
```

``conf.py`` for sphinx settings and the ``Doxyfile`` for doxygen settings.
For all of those, a default is assumed or generated if not present, so neither of those is strictly required.

> It might however be necessary to create and modify those once you want to use features such as custom textual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it might be necessary to create and modify those once you want to use features such as custom textual
```

documentation pages.

rosdoc2.yaml
^^^^^^^^^^^^

This is the main entrypoint for rosdoc2.
It specifies generic settings, and can be used to control the execution of specific builders and decides which builders
to run.

Rosdoc2 provides a multitude of configuration options, which can be adjusted in a config file ``rosdoc2.yaml``.
To generate a default ``rosdoc2.yaml`` to customize, run:

.. code-block:: console

   rosdoc2 default_config --package-path <package-path>

And add ``<rosdoc2>rosdoc2.yaml</rosdoc2>`` to the export section in your ``package.xml``:

.. code-block:: xml

    <package>
        <!-- [...] -->
        <export>
            <!-- [...] -->
            <rosdoc2>rosdoc2.yaml</rosdoc2>
        </export>
    </package>

For most packages however, the default settings in ``rosdoc2`` will suffice, without a custom config file at all.
More information about ``rosdoc2.yaml`` can be found in the
`rosdoc2 readme <https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rosdoc2>`__.

conf.py, rosdoc2_settings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The final output of the package docs is (almost) always built by sphinx.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final output of the package docs is (almost) always built by Sphinx.
```

> Each sphinx project is configured by a ``conf.py`` file in the ``doc`` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Sphinx project is configured by a ``conf.py`` file in the ``doc`` directory.
```

> If no configuration is present, a default sphinx project is created and used when building the documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no configuration is present, a default Sphinx project is created and used when building the documentation.
```

> If however a ``conf.py`` sphinx config is found in the ``doc`` subdirectory of the package, this is used instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If however a ``conf.py`` Sphinx config is found in the ``doc`` subdirectory of the package, this is used instead.
```

> A custom sphinx project is required if handwritten documentation pages should be included (which requires including

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A custom Sphinx project is required if standalone reStructuredText documentation pages should be included (which requires including
```

Does this clarify what you meant?

them from ``index.rst``, which the default index does not do).

Doxyfile
^^^^^^^^

Doxygen is a tool for automatically generating C++ API docs from code comments.

> While doxygen can also generate HTML output directly, in the usual workflow for ROS packages, doxygen produces machine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While Doxygen can also generate HTML output directly, in the usual workflow for ROS packages, Doxygen produces machine
```

> readable output in XML format which is then consumed by sphinx and integrated with the rest of the documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
readable output in XML format which is then consumed by Sphinx and integrated with the rest of the documentation.
```

> Doxygen-only docs are possible by only enabling the doxygen builder in ``rosdoc2.yaml``, but rather uncommon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Doxygen-only docs are possible by only enabling the Doxygen builder in ``rosdoc2.yaml``, but rather uncommon.
```

Customizing Sphinx Documentation
--------------------------------

Creating a Sphinx Project
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> In order to add written documentation in addition to the automatically generated API docs, a custom sphinx project is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to add standalone documentation pages in addition to the automatically generated API docs, a custom Sphinx project is
```

I think this may clarify what you meant.

necessary.
This should be created in a subdirectory called ``doc`` in the package directory.

> A new sphinx project can be created by running ``sphinx-quickstart``` in the ``doc`` directory,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new Sphinx project can be created by running ``sphinx-quickstart``` in the ``doc`` directory,
```

answering ``no`` to "Separate source and build directories".
The wizard requires entering the project name, author and version, but this can later be removed and will be provided to

> sphinx by ``rosdoc2`` from your packages ``package.xml``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sphinx by ``rosdoc2`` from your packages ``package.xml``.
```

More information about creating a sphinx project can be found on the

> `sphinx quickstart page <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/quickstart.html>`__,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Sphinx quickstart page <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/quickstart.html>`__,
```

Reviewer: I think it may be helpful here to show the CLI steps involved in creating a Sphinx project.

Customizing ``index.rst``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To add the automatically generated API docs from the default sphinx project for C++ back to a custom landing page,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you would like to create a custom landing page for your package, similar to a Github ``README`` file, to replace the default API documentation created by Spinx, simply add ``generated/index`` to the docs:
```

This may more clearly describe what you are saying.

Author: I think this was supposed to be in a different section, i was moving stuff around quite a bit... I wanted to show how to link to the generated API docs from a custom landing page (the generated api docs wont make be visible at all otherwise)

I will try including that in a way that makes more sense

Reviewer: I think it is fine as is. This is a fairly common case, and something I've been fairly concerned about it.

add ``generated/index`` to the docs:

.. code-block:: rst

   .. toctree::
      :maxdepth: 2

      C++ API Docs <generated/index>

> And for python, add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And for Python, add
```

.. code-block:: rst

    .. toctree::
       :maxdepth: 2

       Python Modules <modules>

> In order for autodoc to find the python modules in your package, it must be added to the python search path in ``conf.py``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order for autodoc to find the Python modules in your package, it must be added to the python search path in ``conf.py``:
```

.. code-block:: python

    sys.path.insert(0, os.path.abspath('.'))

Since rosdoc2 wraps the custom ``conf.py`` with more configuration from a script which will be placed in the package

> root directory during building, ``.`` will refer to the package root during and not the ``doc`` directory.

Reviewer: I think there may be a more clear way of describing what you want here. I think as currently worded this may confuse a lot of people. May I suggest the following:

```suggestion
In this case the ``.``  path in ``os.path.abspath`` refers to the package's directory root, not the package's ``doc`` directory due to the interaction between rosdoc2 and ``conf.py``. 
```

TODO: Test this

> These toctree directives can also be added in separate rst files which are included from index.rst, to place the API docs

Reviewer: I think this could be worded more clearly.  Is this simply saving you can move the default location of the API Docs?

Author: I found the structure of `generated/index` somewhat distracting, so i wanted to recommend moving it one level lower in the TOC... i think it's a bit clearer now

> in a separate directoy next to other docs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in a separate directory next to other docs:
```

For example, add a page ``cpp_api_docs.rst`` besides ``index.rst``, with the following content:

.. code-block:: rst

    C++ API Docs
    ============

    These are the autogenerated docs for the internal implementation.

    .. toctree::
       :maxdepth: 3
       :caption: Contents:

       my_package_name <generated/index>

Which is included from ``index.rst``:

.. code-block:: rst

    .. toctree::
       :maxdepth: 2
       :caption: Contents:

       self
       cpp_api_docs

> This results in the generated docs to appear in a sub-category "C++ API Docs" without cluttering the index page or table of contents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command makes the generated docs appear in a sub-category called "C++ API Docs" so they do not clutter the index page or table of contents.
```
